
----- page 1 -----
Ph.D. Applied Qualifying Exam 2018 (Take Home)
August 23 (9 AM) to August 24 (5 PM)
IMPORTANT - PLEASE READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS CAREFULLY BEFORE
YOU START:
This is the Applied Part of the First-Year PhD Qualifying Exam in Statistics. You are permitted
to consult textbooks and other scholarly resources to help you in completing the assignment, but
you may not consult or discuss these problems in any way with anyone during the time
that the exam is being administered. If you draw on information from any outside resources
(i.e., resources other than class material and notes) then you should clearly cite the source in your
write-up.
You should complete the exam alone, in a room separate from any other test-takers. If you
have technical questions about the two exam problems, you may email Prof.
Sijian Wang at
sijian.wang@stat.rutgers.edu (for problem 1) and Prof. Ziqiang Tan at ztan@stat.rutgers.edu (for
problem 2), cc’ing Prof. Harry Crane (hcrane@stat.rutgers.edu) AND Prof Tirthankar Dasgupta
(td370@stat.rutgers.edu). If you have questions regarding logistics (e.g., submission instructions
given below), please email Prof.
Harry Crane (hcrane@stat.rutgers.edu) AND Prof Tirthankar
Dasgupta (td370@stat.rutgers.edu).
Submission Instructions:
1. Type up your answers to the two problems in two separate Word or Latex ﬁles.
2. Create a folder for each problem. The folder must contain the following:
(a) A word or pdf ﬁle containing your answers to the problem, including all tables, ﬁgures
and Appendices.
(b) An R (or python) ﬁle containing the codes used to generate your results.
(c) A word or a text ﬁle that gives a summary of the codes submitted.
3. Place the two folders into a single folder titled yourlastname yourﬁrstname Appliedexam2018.
Zip this folder and email it to hcrane@stat.rutgers.edu AND td370@stat.rutgers.edu by 5 PM
August 24, Friday.
1

----- page 2 -----
Problem 1
Background
Bone may be more sensitive to loading (applied force) during growth than in adulthood, yielding
greater beneﬁts in bone mass, geometry and strength for future fracture prevention. However, it is
unknown whether loading during speciﬁc key maturity phases yields superior long-term beneﬁts.
This information is critical to the development of targeted physical activity programming for re-
duction of long-term osteoporosis fracture risk. The study described in the following section was
conducted with the aim of obtaining such information.
Research Design and available data
This study includes 46 female subjects, who form a subset from an ongoing longitudinal study
(1997-present). These subjects were recruited from local gymnastics clubs, local grade schools and
girl scout troops and were divided into the following categories:
1. NON (indicated as group 2 in column F of the data ﬁle): Subjects who never had gymnastics.
2. GYM (indicated as group 1 in column F of the data ﬁle): Subjects who practiced gymnastics.
At the time of enrollment, the subjects in the NON group were matched to GYM by group for
chronological age at menarche, size, and physical maturity. Each subject underwent annual whole
body and regional DXA scans on dates indicated in column B of the data ﬁle.
The response
recorded in column M is Sub-head bone mineral content or Sub-head BMC. Several covariates were
recorded for each subject at the time of each DXA scan. A detailed description of the data in the
columns of the Excel ﬁle “GYM VS NON” is given in Section “Data description”.
Questions
1. Is this study a randomized experiment or an observational study? What is the treatment
whose eﬀect is being studied?
2. The study claims to have matched subjects in the NON group and GYM group with respect
to chronological age at menarche, size and physical maturity (as measured by standing height,
FA length and Sub-Head LM). Analyze the data and examine to what extent these covariates
2

----- page 3 -----
are balanced in the NON and the GYM group. Provide a written summary of your analysis,
using tables and/or graphs as appropriate and draw conclusions (Your answer to this part
should not exceed two pages).
3. The eventual goal of this study is to investigate the association between gymnastics and bone
development. Perform an exploratory analysis (that is simple summaries and plotting of the
data - no modeling) as the ﬁrst step to achieving this goal. Provide interpretations of the
graphs and tables you present (You answer to this part should not exceed two pages).
NOTE: Your combined answers to parts 4 and 5 should not exceed six pages
including all tables, graphs, their interpretations, comments and remarks.
4. Develop a model for investigating the association between gymnastics and bone development,
explaining the logic behind your choice. Provide interpretations of the model parameters.
Note that this model development process may be iterative, in the sense that you start with a
simple preliminary model, drawing inputs from the exploratory analysis, and then improve it
based on model diagnostics and/or prediction performance.
5. Provide a clearly written description of your assessment of the eﬀect of gymnastics on bone
development, using data summaries, tables and graphs as appropriate.
Data description
• ID: Subject ID number
• Group Division (GYM=1, NON=2): NON group: never exposed to gymnastics; GYM: were
explosed to gymnastics.
• Covariates:
– DXA Date: The date on which the subject got DXA scans.
– Chronological Age at Menarche: Age of the subject when she had the menarche.
– Menarcheal Age @ DXA: The diﬀerence between Chronological Age at DXA and Chrono-
logical Age at Menarche.
– Date Quit Gymnastics: The date on which the subject quit gymnastics.
– Menarcheal Age @ Quit Date: Menarcheal Age when the subject quit gymnastics.
– Standing Height: Height of the subject.
– FA length (cm): Length of forearm.
3

----- page 4 -----
– Sub-Head LM (kg): Lean mass of sub-head.
– Non-Gym Physical Activity (hrs/wk): Hours per week of the non-gymnastic physical
activities.
– Gymnastics (hrs/wk): Hours per week of the gymnastic activities.
• Sub-head BMC (Response): Sub-head bone mineral content.
4

----- page 5 -----
Problem 2
Suppose that we observe Y = (y1, y2, y3, y4) from a multinomial distribution:
Y ∼Multinomial

n; 1 + θ
3
, 1 −θ
3
, 1 −θ
3
, θ
3

,
where n = 200. Consider the data augmentation Z = (u1, u2, y2, y3, y4) such that y1 = u1 + u2 and
Z ∼Multinomial

n; 1
3, θ
3, 1 −θ
3
, 1 −θ
3
, θ
3

.
(i) Derive an Expectation-Maximization (EM) algorithm based on the preceding data augmen-
tation, to ﬁnd the maximum likelihood estimator (MLE) of θ (denoted as ˆθ).
(ii) Denote by p(y; θ) the probability mass function of Y , and by f(z; θ) the probability mass
function of Z. Show that
d2
dθ2 log p(Y ; θ) = Eθ
 d2
dθ2 log p(Z; θ)

+ varθ
 d
dθ log p(Z; θ)

,
where Eθ() and varθ() are evaluated under the conditional distribution of Z given Y , derived from
the probability mass function f(z; θ) for Z. [Note that Y is a function of Z.]
(iii) Use the result from (ii) to show that the observed Fisher information and hence an estimate
of the asymptotic variance (denoted as ˆV ) for the MLE ˆθ, can also be obtained from the output of
the EM algorithm in (i).
(iv) Implement the EM algorithm to compute the MLE ˆθ and its estimated asymptotic variance
ˆV using R. Report your results (in the form of estimate ± standard error) when it is observed that
Y = (108, 31, 27, 34).
(v) Design and perform a simulation study (with a ﬁxed sample size n) to numerically investigate
whether (1) the MLE of θ is approximately normally distributed, centered about the true value of θ,
and (2) the variance of the MLE ˆθ is closely estimated by ˆV . Explain and interpret the simulation
results clearly.
5
