
----- page 1 -----
PH.D. APPLIED QUALIFYING EXAM 2019 (TAKE HOME)
IMPORTANT - PLEASE READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS CAREFULLY BEFORE
YOU START:
This is the Applied Part of the First-Year PhD Qualifying Exam in Statistics. You are permitted
to consult textbooks and other scholarly resources to help you in completing the assignment, but
you may not consult or discuss these problems in any way with anyone during the time
that the exam is being administered. If you draw on information from any outside resources
(i.e., resources other than class material and notes) then you should clearly cite the source in your
write-up.
You should complete the exam alone, in a room separate from any other test-takers. If you
have technical questions about the two exam problems, you may email Prof.
Sijian Wang at
sijian.wang@stat.rutgers.edu (for problem 1) and Prof. Ying Hung at yhung@stat.rutgers.edu (for
problem 2), cc’ing Prof. Harry Crane (hcrane@stat.rutgers.edu) AND Prof Tirthankar Dasgupta
(td370@stat.rutgers.edu). If you have questions regarding logistics (e.g., submission instructions
given below), please email Prof.
Harry Crane (hcrane@stat.rutgers.edu) AND Prof Tirthankar
Dasgupta (td370@stat.rutgers.edu).
Submission Instructions:
(1) Type up your answers to the two problems in two separate Word or Latex ﬁles.
(2) Create a folder for each problem. The folder must contain the following:
(a) A word or pdf ﬁle containing your answers to the problem, including all tables, ﬁgures
and Appendices.
(b) An R (or python) ﬁle containing the codes used to generate your results.
(c) A word or a text ﬁle that gives a summary of the codes submitted.
(3) Place the two folders into a single folder titled yourlastname yourﬁrstname Appliedexam2018.
Zip this folder and email it to hcrane@stat.rutgers.edu AND td370@stat.rutgers.edu by 5
PM July 26, Friday.
Date: July 25 (9 AM) to July 26 (5 PM).
1

----- page 2 -----
2
PH.D. APPLIED QUALIFYING EXAM 2019 (TAKE HOME)
Problem 1
Background
As of 2010, 82% of the U.S. and 50.5% of the worldwide population lived in urban areas.
As urban lands and population continue to increase, urban areas are sources of greenhouse gas
emission, increased streamﬂow, nutrient export, and decreased biodiversity. However, urban forests
provide a range of ecosystem services to oﬀset these negative environmental eﬀects of urbanization.
Urban trees sequester carbon through photosynthesis, decrease stormwater runoﬀby intercepting
rainwater, reduce nutrient export through blue their root systems, and increase biodiversity by
providing habitat and food to a variety of wildlife. Information on tree species composition and
stand structure are necessary for understanding urban forest status and functions. It can be also
used to assess the impacts of insect disturbance (e.g. Emerald ash borer, and Dutch elm disease),
and help city foresters make management strategies.
Rapid advances in remote sensing technology enable eﬃcient surveying of large areas of for-
est. Generally, remote sensing is to acquire information of objects on the earth through sensor
instruments put on a platform such as an airplane or satellite. Diﬀerent sensors are designed for
a wide range of purposes and applications. For example, multi-spectral remote sensing has been
widely used in global mapping of land cover and land use change. For the purpose of this project,
two types of sensor (Lidar and AVIRIS hyperspectral sensors) are of particular interest (see Data
section for more details).
Objective and description of data
The overarching goal of this research is to map the tree species composition for forests in certain
areas in the U.S., using remote sensing data. The speciﬁc goal is to use remote sensing data to
build predictive models for the proportion of abundance for a given species as measured by relative
basal area (RBA) estimated from ﬁeld data. The two types of data: remote sensing data and ﬁeld
data are described below.
Remote sensing data. The remote sensing data include two sources: (1) Hyperspectral imagery
from NASA’s AVIRIS sensor, and (2) Lidar data collected by the city of Madison. Hyperspectral
data consist of reﬂectance measurements every 10 nm between 400 and 2500 nm, excluding wave-
lengths for which there are atmospheric absorption features that interfere with the remote sensing
signal. This means that there are on the order of 182 “bands” of data.
Lidar data consist of measurements that come from laser pulses reﬂected from canopies, branches,
or ground, and are summarized into a number of metrics of both height distribution from the lidar
return and intensity distribution. Think of it this way: the hyperspectral information tells you the

----- page 3 -----
PH.D. APPLIED QUALIFYING EXAM 2019 (TAKE HOME)
3
reﬂectance of the canopy by sunlight, and the lidar data gives you information about the vertical
structure of the canopy.
Diﬀerent species have diﬀerent reﬂectance characteristics and diﬀerent vertical proﬁles that we
can use to identify the composition of the species that occur in a location. The diﬀerences in the
species may have to do with diﬀerent leaf shapes (broad vs. needle leaves), or diﬀerent chemistries,
or diﬀerent canopy shapes (think of how a conical ﬁr tree is diﬀerent from a more spherical oak).
To that end, we have used the hyperspectral imagery and lidar data to map canopy chemistry
and vertical structure, independent of species composition. Speciﬁcally, we have measures of foliar
concentration of carbon, cellulose, ﬁber, lignin, leaf mass per area (LMA), nitrogen, as well as
indices NDVI, PRI, NDWI and NDII capturing vegetation abundance, light use eﬃciency and
water content, all derived from the hyperspectral images. In addition, we have biomass, basal area,
average tree diameter, canopy height, crown length, and crown width, all derived from lidar.
Field data. For the ﬁeld data, each observation is a measurement from a ﬁeld plot sampled by
expert forestry students. At each plot, the researchers have calculated the basal area (BA, trunk
cross sectional area) of each species present at the plot. Composition can therefore be described
two ways: basal area by species, or relative basal area by species. That is, for each species on a
plot, we can divide its basal area by the total plot basal area to get an estimate of relative basal
area. The relative basal area (RBA) by species is what we want to predict. At each location we are
really only interested in correctly estimating species with RBA greater than about 10%. Species
with less than 5-10% would just be considered low or rare, compared to other species. All estimates
of species need to add to 100% (we cannot have more than 100% relative basal area). This gives us
proportional estimates of composition by species. Later we can group these together to estimate
forest types.
Data file
The data set available includes:
(1) Field data: plot ID, total basal area, basal area for 10 tree species, and basal area for the
rest of species in the ﬁeld plots;
(2) Remote sensing data derived from lidar data: The measures of forest structure derived from
lidar for all the listed ﬁeld plots are shown in the columns AGB, BA, DBH, Ht, CL and
CW;
(3) Remote sensing data derived from hyperspectral data: The measures of canopy chemistry,
LMA and indices derived from hyperspectral imagery for all the listed ﬁeld plots are shown
in the columns of C, Cellulose, Fiber, Lig, LMA, N, NDVI, PRI, NDWI and NDII, as well
as standard deviations of these measures within the plot:
C_sd, Cellulose_sd, Fiber_sd, Lig_sd, LMA_sd, N_sd, NDVI_sd, PRI_sd, NDWI_sd, NDII_sd.

----- page 4 -----
4
PH.D. APPLIED QUALIFYING EXAM 2019 (TAKE HOME)
(4) The datasheet with the “Data” tab lists ﬁeld data and remote sensing data; and that with
the “Description” tab gives more detailed description of each column of data.
Questions
A. Conduct an exploratory data analysis to assess the relation between RBA and lidar/hyperspectral
data. In particular, use a speciﬁc dimension reduction method and create visualizations for
the relationship.
B. Using hyperspectral data, construct a predictive model for the proportion of: (1) white oak
(2) white pine and (3) ash. Provide statistical evaluation of prediction performance and
statistical assessment of variable importance (for prediction) for your model. Remember
that the summation of three predicted RBA for the three species should be always less than
or equal to 1 (on any future data).
C. Repeat the analysis of question B using the lidar data.
D. An emerging idea is to combine both types of remote sensing data for the purpose of
constructing a predictive model.
Explore this possibility with each of the three species
above (i.e., (1) white oak (2) white pine and (3) ash) and argue for or against this idea of
combining hyperspectral data and lidar data.)
E. What are the essential steps to take next for achieving the overarching goal of mapping tree
species composition for forests in this study area, using remote sensing data? Provide your
recommendations to the researchers and explain your reasoning.

----- page 5 -----
PH.D. APPLIED QUALIFYING EXAM 2019 (TAKE HOME)
5
Problem 2
Generate seven equally spaced points denoted by (x1, · · · , x7), from the interval [0,1]. For each
of these input points, generate seven responses (y1, · · · , y7) using the function:
(1)
Y (x) = exp(−1.4x) cos
7πx
2

.
(1) Consider a Gaussian process model:
Y (x) = µ + Z(x),
where µ is an unknown constant and Z(x) is a Gaussian process with mean 0 and covariance
function deﬁned as cov [Z(x + h), Z(x)] = σ2φ(h; θ).
Assume the following form of the
correlation function φ(h; θ):
φ(h; θ) = exp(−θh2).
Write down the expressions for the maximum likelihood estimators (MLE) for parameters
µ, θ, and σ2 and calculate their values based on the generated seven pairs of observations
(xj, yj), j = 1, . . . , 7.
(2) Write down the Best linear unbiased predictor (BLUP) of Y (x0) at x = x0 and its predictive
distribution after plugging in the MLEs of the parameters.
(3) Now generate 1000 equally spaced points x∗
j, j = 1, . . . , 1000 over (0,1).
Generate the
corresponding responses y using the same function (1).
(4) Compare the MLE-EBLUP (the empirical BLUPs based on the MLEs) at input points
x∗
j, j = 1, . . . , 1000 with the corresponding true values generated in (3) by plotting the
predictions along with the true values.
(5) Using the predictive distribution described in (2), add the 95% predictive conﬁdence bands
to the plot generated in (4).
(6) Prove that the BLUP is an interpolator and demonstrate the interpolation property using
your answers to (4) and (5).
(7) Using the same training data (seven data points) used earlier to ﬁt the Gaussian process
model, ﬁt a spline-based interpolating model to predict Y (x) from x.
Using the data
generated in (3) as the testing data, compare the prediction performances of the Gaussian
process model and the spline-based model and comment. Do you think there is any tangible
advantage or disadvantage that one method has over the other, apart from their predictive
performances? If so, mention it in a couple of sentences.
