
----- page 1 -----
PH.D. APPLIED QUALIFYING EXAM 2023 (TAKE HOME)
IMPORTANT - PLEASE READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS CAREFULLY BEFORE
YOU START:
This is the Applied Part of the First-Year PhD Qualifying Exam in Statistics. The exam consists
of two problems, both of which you need to answer. You are permitted to consult textbooks and
other scholarly resources to help you in completing the assignment, but you may not consult or
discuss these problems in any way with anyone during the time that the exam is being
administered. If you draw on information from any outside resources (i.e., resources other than
class material and notes) then you should clearly cite the source in your write-up.
You should complete the exam alone, in a room separate from any other test-takers. If you have
questions, please email Prof. Han Xiao (hxiao@stat.rutgers.edu) AND Prof Tirthankar Dasgupta
(td370@stat.rutgers.edu).
Submission Instructions:
(1) Create a folder containing the following:
(a) A word, html or pdf file containing your answers to the two problems, including all
tables, figures and Appendices (this may be generated from an R markdown file)
(b) An R (or python) file containing the codes used to generate your results, or an R
markdown file from which your output html or pdf is generated.
(c) A word or a text file that gives a summary of the codes submitted (not required if you
submit an R markdown file).
(2) Name the folder yourlastname yourfirstname Appliedexam2023. Zip this folder and
email it to hxiao@stat.rutgers.edu AND td370@stat.rutgers.edu by 5 PM July 7, Friday.
Date: July 5 (5 PM) to July 7 (5 PM).
1

----- page 2 -----
2
PH.D. APPLIED QUALIFYING EXAM 2023 (TAKE HOME)
Problem 1
1. Overview
In this problem, you will be acting as statistical consultants for a company that manufactures
consumer products, and answer specific questions asked by the company management, who do
not care much about the novelty of statistical methodology you use, as long as their questions are
answered. However, your methodology (and its statistical validity) is accountable to your despicable
bosses – Ying Hung and Tirthankar Dasgupta. There is no need to restrict your answers to what
was covered in Stat 596 and Stat 597. Use your instincts, your previous training in data analysis,
and focus on answering the questions of interest using correct statistical methodology.
2. Background
The company has conducted a product marketing experiment before launching a new dish-
washing detergent. Two “test” detergents were manufactured. A total of 549 households were
chosen as the experimental units for this study, and the two test products were assigned randomly
to these households. Each household received by mail one of two test products, used the product
and returned a survey regarding the product’s performance. The survey data ia available in the file
market_survey_data_mod.csv.
The first column (A) of the file contains the household identification number ranging from 1 to
549, and the second column (B) contains the test product number (nominal variable with values
1–2) assigned to the household. The Columns C through K marked in green contain the outcomes
or the response variables and are answers to the following questions on a scale of 1–3, with 1 being
the worst and 3 being the best.
(1) Column C: Does the product provide value for money? (1:Poor, 3:Excellent)
(2) Column D: How would you rate the product overall? (1:Poor, 3:Excellent)
(3) Column E: How do you rate the product with respect to its performance (cleaning dishes)?
(1:Poor, 3:Excellent)
(4) Column F: Do you like the scent (perfume) of the product? (1:Poor, 3:Excellent)
(5) Column G: Does use of the product irritate your hand? (1:A lot, 3:Not at all)
(6) Column H: Did you like the color of the product? (1: Not at all, 2: Very much)
(7) Column I: Are you satisfied with the packaging? (1:Not at all, 3: Extremely satisfied)
(8) Column J: How much effort did you spend in dispensing the detergent? (1:A lot of effort,
3: It was very easy)
(9) Column K: Did you think the package was filled as per your expectation: (1:Poor, 3:Excel-
lent)

----- page 3 -----
PH.D. APPLIED QUALIFYING EXAM 2023 (TAKE HOME)
3
Note that the responses in columns C and D represent the users’ overall evaluation of the
product, whereas the other columns represent their views on specific aspects of the product. The
outcome in column D (overall rating) is the one of primary interest to the management, although
they are also interested in the other outcomes.
The survey also collected covariate information that are reported in the blue columns L through
R. Descriptions of these columns are given below:
(1) Column L: Do you place the product directly under a running stream of water? (Yes/No)
(2) Column M: How do you wash dishes (1= only by hand; 2=most of them by hand but
some in machine; 3=some by hand but most of them in machine; 4= equally by hand and
machine; 5=only in machine)
(3) Column N: Have you been using brand X of dishwashing detergent during the past six
months (prior to this survey)? (Yes/No)
(4) Column O: Household income (nominal variable with 11 levels)
(5) Column P: Age of the person primarily responsible for washing dishes in the house (nominal
variable with 6 levels, each level measuring an interval, e.g. 15-24.)
(6) Column Q: Number of hand washes per week (discrete variable)
(7) Column R: Hispanic? (Yes/No)
3. Questions
(1) There are many missing observations in the Excel file, both with respect to outcomes
and covariates. Can you quickly compile these missing values by questions and create a
visualization to see whether there are specific questions that have lower response rates?
(2) Is it possible to predict the overall performance measures (columns C and D) from the
remaining performance measures (columns E to K)? That is, do the ratings on specific fea-
tures like performance, perfume, color, packaging, effect on hand, ease of dispensing, extent
to which the package is filled, affect the overall performance measures? If so, fit appropri-
ate models (individual model for each overall performance measure) for each product, and
compare them.
(3) How well can you predict the overall performance measures for each product from the co-
variates? Fit appropriate statistical models (individual model for each overall performance
measure) and compare them for the two products.
(4) Does it appear that the two test products differ significantly with respect to the response
of primary interest (overall rating)? If they do, which is better?
Write a report to the management answering the above four questions. Feel free to use any statistical
methodology you want to, but state your analysis methods clearly and unambiguously. You can
use any R package you want to and/or write your own codes. Submit your R codes so that your

----- page 4 -----
4
PH.D. APPLIED QUALIFYING EXAM 2023 (TAKE HOME)
results can be replicated. You can also create a single R markdown file with your codes and the
html or pdf file generated from it.

----- page 5 -----
PH.D. APPLIED QUALIFYING EXAM 2023 (TAKE HOME)
5
Problem 2
Assume that a deep learning algorithm involving two tuning parameters, x1 and x2, is given to
perform image recognition. It is also assumed that the underlying performance of these two tuning
parameters in terms of prediction error can be described by the following deterministic function:
y =
[1 + (x1 + x2 + 1)2(19 −14x1 + 3x2
1 −14x2 + 6x1x2 + 3x2
2)] ×
[30 + (2x1 −3x2)2(18 −32x1 + 12x2
1 + 48x2 −36x1x2 + 27x2
2)],
where y is the average prediction error, x1 and x2 are evaluated on a square defined by xi ∈[−2, 2]
for i = 1, 2.
(1) In reality, this relationship is unknown. Instead we can train the deep learning algorithm on
50 different tuning parameters settings sampled from the square, denoted by (x1j, x2j) and
collect the corresponding y, denoted by yj, from the given relationship, where i = 1, · · · , 50.
Based on this idea, conduct a simulation to generate training data on the tuning parameters
and the prediction error with sample size 50. Visualize the training data by plotting
(1a) the true deterministic function v.s. x1 with x2 = 2,
(1b) the true deterministic function v.s. x2 with x1 = −2,
(1c) the true deterministic function (3D plot) with the training data labelled.
(2) Fit a surrogate model based on the training data by assuming the data are realizations from
a Gaussian process Y = µ+Z(x), where µ is unknown and Z(x) is a Gaussian process with
mean 0 and covariance function defined by cov(Y ((x + h), Y (x)) = σ2ϕ(h; θ). Define the
correlation function ϕ(h; θ) by
ϕ(h; θ) = exp(−θh2).
Write down the theoretical expressions of MLEs for parameters µ, θ, and σ2. Based on the
50 observations, what are your estimated MLEs?
(3) Based on (2), write down the best linear unbiased predictor (BLUP) and the (plugin)
predictive distribution of y at x1 = x∗
1 and x2 = x∗
2?
(4) Based on the predictive distribution described in (3), plot the BLUP and the 95% predictive
confidence bands on (1a) and (1b).
(5) Based on the BLUP found in (3), what is the best tuning parameter setting that minimizes
y?
(6) If you are allowed to add five more training data points, what are the parameter settings
you would like to try? Provide a brief justification behind selection of these points.
(7) Based on the same set of data, fit a spline-based model and find the corresponding best
tuning parameter settings that minimize y.
