
----- page 1 -----
MASTER’S COMPREHENSIVE EXAMINATION 
 
Part II Applied (90 minutes) December, 6th 2014 
Instructions: Attempt any three out of the following four questions on both pages. 
Mention which three you would like to have graded. Open book and open notes. 
 
 
1 
1. Rutgers Scientists have discovered how to generate a new atomic particle they 
have named the “SNOOKI”).   SNOOKIs decay quickly after being generated having 
an exponential decay function.  The probability a SNOOKI decays at “t” seconds 
after it is generated is te-at for a > 0 unknown.  It is impossible to observe the exact 
time of decay of a given particle, but Rutgers can determine if a SNOOKI has 
decayed prior to 10 seconds.  For 25 SNOOKIs that were generated, 5 decayed in 
less than 10 seconds and 20 had not.   Give a point estimate for and a 95% 
confidence interval for a, the parameter of the decay function. 
 
2. A researcher seeks to compare the sodium content in beef, chicken and turkey 
hotdogs. The researcher takes a random sample of 20 beef hotdogs, 20 poultry 
hotdogs, and 20 mixed meat hotdogs, and measures their sodium content.  Assume 
sodium content is normally distributed.  The following is the data on the means 
and standard deviations of sodium content: 
                            n         Mean           Standard Deviation       
Beef                    20        400                   100 
Poultry                20        480                    90 
Mixed Meat        20        410                    85 
 
a) Test the null hypothesis that for sodium content, Ho:  Mean Beef=Mean Poultry = Mean 
Mixed meat, versus the alternative hypothesis Not Ho. 
b) A school lunch program wants to compare the sodium content of a hotdog in two alternative 
diets: 
Diet A:  A Mixed Meat Hotdog 
Diet B: half the time serve a Beef Hotdog, and half the time serve a Poultry Hotdog 
Test the Null hypothesis that there is no difference in the average sodium content in the hotdog 
in the two diets, versus the alternative hypothesis that there is a difference. 
 
3.  A radiologist examines mammograms to detect breast cancer tumors.  The goal is to detect 
tumors in their very early stages when they are very small.  A company developed a computer 
program to be used by a medical technician to examine mammograms for the same purpose.  A 
researcher had a sample of 100 mammograms that were determined (by subsequent biopsies) to 
have tiny tumors.  The researcher had a radiologist review the 100 mammograms and for each 
state whether or not tumors were detected.  The researcher also had a non-medical technician 
use the computer program to analyze the same 100 mammograms, and for each state whether 
or not tumors were detected.  The null hypothesis is that the radiologist and computer program 
would equally often correctly detect tiny tumors.  The research hypothesis is that the medical 
technician with the computer program would correctly detect tiny tumors more often than the 
radiologist.  The researcher found that the radiologist detected tiny tumors in 65 of the 
mammograms, while the medical technician detected tumors in 80 of the mammograms.  There 
were 5 mammograms where neither the radiologist, nor the medical technician with computer 
detected tumors.  Carry out the test at the 0.05 level of significance.  Show the details of your 
analysis including formula used and substitutions into formula.

----- page 2 -----
. 
 
 
2 
4.  Below are data on numbers of; AIDs Cases, AIDs Cases caused by PCP and AIDS Cases 
caused by KS for two American cities.  (Note AIDS cannot be caused by both PCP and KS at 
the same time).  
 
CITY 
AIDS CASES 
TOTAL 
CAUSED BY PCP 
CAUSED BY KS 
Des Moines 
200 
30 
30 
El Paso 
200 
20 
50 
 
                      Let pD  be the portion of AIDS cases in Des Moines caused by PCP 
                             pE  be the portion of AIDS cases in El Paso caused by PCP 
 
                                           kD  be the portion of AIDS cases in Des Moines caused by KS 
                             kE  be the portion of AIDS cases in El Paso caused by KS 
 
 
a. Dr. LP believes that pE = pD .  Use the data above to give a large sample test of a 
two sided alternative hypothesis against the appropriate null at α=0.05 
 
 
b. Dr. PL believes kD = 2pD. Use the data above to give a large sample test of a two 
sided alternative hypothesis against the appropriate null at α=0.05 
 
 
 
 
